================================
Command: strophe
================================

--------------

COMMAND
~~~~~~~

**strophe** -- selectively extract strophic data for Humdrum inputs

--------------

SYNOPSIS
~~~~~~~~

`` strophe  [-s strophe_list | -x strophe_label]  [inputfile ...]``

--------------

DESCRIPTION
~~~~~~~~~~~

The **strophe** command is used to isolate or extract selective strophic
data. Strophic data encode alternative concurrent information for a
given passage. Examples of alternative concurrent information might
include the texts for different verses of a song, alternative renditions
of the same passage (such as *ossia* passages), or differing editorial
interpretations of a given note or sequence of notes.

The **strophe** command permits the user to extract selected information
paths (called *strophes*) present in a Humdrum input.

Structurally, strophic data must begin from a single common spine, split
apart into two or more alternative spines, and then rejoin to form a
single spine. Since the strophes split from a common spine, all strophic
data necessarily begin by sharing the same data type. Different
exclusive interpretations may be introduced in the strophic passage --
provided all strophic spines end up sharing the same data type just
prior to being rejoined.

The beginning of a strophic passage is signalled by the presence of a
*strophic passage initiator* -- a single asterisk followed by the
keyword "strophe" (``*strophe``). The end of a strophic passage is
signalled by the *strophic passage terminator* -- a single asterisk
followed by the upper-case letter \`S' followed by a minus sign
(``*S-``). Each spine within the strophic passage begins with a *strophe
label* and ends with a *strophe end indicator* (``*S/fin``).

Strophe labels may consist of either alphanumeric names, or numbers.
Numerical labels should be used when the strophic data imply some sort
of order, such as verses in a song. Alphanumeric labels are convenient
for distinguishing different editions or *ossia* passages. The following
example encodes a melodic phrase containing four numbered verses from
"Das Wandern" from *Die Schöne Müllerin* by Schubert. ````

    +------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | !! Franz Schubert, \`Das Wandern' from "Die Schoene Muellerin"   |
    +------------------------------------------------------------------+

    \*\*kern
    \*\*text
    \*>[V,V,V,V]
    \*>[V,V,V,V]
    \*>V
    \*>V
    \*k[b-e-]
    \*Deutsch
    \*
    \*solo
    \*
    \*strophe
    \*
    \*^
    \*
    \*^
    \*^
    \*
    \*S/1
    \*S/2
    \*S/3
    \*S/4
    8f
    Das
    Vom
    Das
    Die
    =5
    =5
    =5
    =5
    =5
    8f
    Wan-
    Was-
    sehn
    Stei-
    8b-
    -dern
    -ser
    wir
    -ne
    8a
    ist
    ha-
    auch
    selbst ,
    8ee-
    des
    -ben
    den
    so
    =6
    =6
    =6
    =6
    =6
    (16dd
    Mül-
    wir's
    Rä-
    schwer
    )16ff
    \|
    \|
    \|
    \|
    (16dd
    -lers
    ge-
    -dern
    sie
    )16b-
    \|
    \|
    \|
    \|
    8f
    Lust ,
    -lernt ,
    ab ,
    sind ,
    8dd
    das
    vom
    den
    die
    =7
    =7
    =7
    =7
    =7
    (8.cc
    Wan-
    Was-
    Rä-
    Stei-
    )16a
    \|
    \|
    \|
    \|
    8b-
    -dern !
    -ser !
    -dern !
    -ne !
    8r
    %
    %
    %
    %
    \*
    \*S/fin
    \*S/fin
    \*S/fin
    \*S/fin
    \*
    \*v
    \*v
    \*v
    \*v
    \*
    \*S-
    \*-
    \*-

Notice that this file contains a single section labelled \`V' (verse)
and that an expansion list occurs near the beginning of the file that
indicates the section is to be repeated 4 times in total.

The strophic passage in the above example pertains only to the spine
marked ``**text``. Following the strophic passage indicator
(``*strophe``), the spine is split apart until the required number of
verses are generated. Then each spine is labelled with its own strophe
label. Since the verses have an order, it is appropriate to label them
with numbers:\ ``*S/1, *S/2,`` and so on. The individual verses are
terminated with strophe end indicators (``*S/fin``), the spines rejoin,
and then a strophic passage terminator (``*S-``) marks the end of the
strophic passage.

Executing the command:

    `` strophe -s 4``

produces the following output: ````

    +------------------------------------------------------------------+
    | !! Franz Schubert, \`Das Wandern' from "Die Schoene Muellerin"   |
    +------------------------------------------------------------------+

    +----------------+----------------+
    | \*\*kern       | \*\*text       |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | \*>[V,V,V,V]   | \*>[V,V,V,V]   |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | \*>V           | \*>V           |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | \*k[b-e-]      | \*Deutsch      |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | \*             | \*solo         |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | 8f             | Die            |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | =5             | =5             |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | 8f             | Stei-          |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | 8b-            | -ne            |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | 8a             | selbst ,       |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | 8ee-           | so             |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | =6             | =6             |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | (16dd          | schwer         |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | )16ff          | \|             |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | (16dd          | sie            |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | )16b-          | \|             |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | 8f             | sind ,         |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | 8dd            | die            |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | =7             | =7             |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | (8.cc          | Stei-          |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | )16a           | \|             |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | 8b-            | -ne !          |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | 8r             | %              |
    +----------------+----------------+
    | \*-            | \*-            |
    +----------------+----------------+

Strophic encodings are nearly always encoded in *abbreviated* rather
than *through-composed* file formats. Abbreviated encodings employ
*section labels* and *expansion-lists* in order to identify how various
passages are repeated and ordered.

When extracting a single strophe, either the abbreviated or
through-composed versions can be used as input. However, when using the
**strophe** command to select more than one strophe for output, it is
essential that the input first be expanded to a through-composed
version, via the `**thru** <thru.html>`__ command. For example, in order
to select the first and third verses in the above passage by Schubert,
the user would need to execute the following command pipeline:

    `` thru wandern | strophe -s 1,3``

The list following the **-s** option can contain individual strophes
separated by commas. For example, the following command extracts verses
1, 3 and 4 in succession:

    `` thru wandern | strophe -s 1,3,4``

Strophes may also be output in non-numeric order as in the following
command invocation:

    `` thru wandern | strophe -s 4,3,2,1``

If the **-x** option is invoked, **strophe** outputs only a single
strophe whose string *label* is specified as an option. Strophe names
need not be numerical. E.g.

    `` strophe -x ossia``

If the **strophe** command is invoked without any option, then all
strophes are expanded in the output in numerical order beginning with
strophe 1. Missing numerical strophes (such as a missing strophe ``S/3``
in a four-strophe encoding) will cause an error to be generated and
terminate the **strophe** command.

Note that the **strophe** command allows strophe numbers containing a
single decimal point, such as strophe ``*S/4.2``. Having extracted the
verse ``*S/1``, the **strophe** command will output verse ``*S/1.1`` in
preference to ``*S/2`` -- if the decimal strophe is present. This
feature allows more than one strophic passage to be encoded within a
single abbreviated format file. This feature might prove useful, for
example, in a musical work that contains a brief refrain in the middle
of each verse.

The various strophe-related tandem interpretations are summarized below:

    +------------------+-------------------------------+
    | \*strophe        | strophic passage initiator    |
    +------------------+-------------------------------+
    | \*S-             | strophic passage terminator   |
    +------------------+-------------------------------+
    | \*S/\ *string*   | strophe name label            |
    +------------------+-------------------------------+
    | \*S/\ *n[.n]*    | strophe number label          |
    +------------------+-------------------------------+
    | \*S/fin          | strophe end indicator         |
    +------------------+-------------------------------+

*Types of Strophe Interpretations*

Note that for each strophic passage, all strophe labels must appear on
the same record. See `EXAMPLES <#EXAMPLES>`__ below.

--------------

OPTIONS
~~~~~~~

The *strophe* command provides the following options:

    +-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
    | **-h**                | displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax   |
    +-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
    | -s *strophe\_list*    | output numbered strophes according to *strophe\_list*   |
    +-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
    | -x *strophe\_label*   | output only strophes labelled *strophe\_label*          |
    +-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+

Options are specified in the command line.

--------------

EXAMPLES
~~~~~~~~

The following example is concocted to illustrate the operation of the
**strophe** command. Consider the following Humdrum input: ````

    !! \`strophe' example.
    \*\*example
    \*\*bar
    \*>[A,V,V,Coda]
    \*>[A,V,V,Coda]
    \*>A
    \*>A
    A
    i
    \*>V
    \*>V
    \*
    \*\*foo
    \*
    \*strophe
    \*
    \*^
    \*
    \*S/1
    \*S/2
    B
    1
    2
    \*
    \*S/fin
    \*S/fin
    \*
    \*v
    \*v
    \*
    \*S-
    \*
    \*\*bar
    C
    refrain
    \*
    \*strophe
    \*
    \*^
    \*
    \*S/1.1
    \*S/2.1
    B
    1
    2
    \*
    \*S/fin
    \*S/fin
    \*
    \*v
    \*v
    \*
    \*S-
    \*>Coda
    \*>Coda
    \*
    \*\*foo
    E
    i
    \*-
    \*-

Since this file is in abbreviated format, we must first expand it to
through-composed form using the `**thru** <thru.html>`__ command. The
resulting output is: ````

    !! \`strophe' example.
    \*\*example
    \*\*bar
    \*thru
    \*thru
    \*>A
    \*>A
    A
    i
    \*>V
    \*>V
    \*
    \*\*foo
    \*
    \*thru
    \*
    \*strophe
    \*
    \*^
    \*
    \*S/1
    \*S/2
    B
    1
    2
    \*
    \*S/fin
    \*S/fin
    \*
    \*v
    \*v
    \*
    \*S-
    \*
    \*\*bar
    \*
    \*thru
    C
    refrain
    \*
    \*strophe
    \*
    \*^
    \*
    \*S/1.1
    \*S/2.1
    B
    1
    2
    \*
    \*S/fin
    \*S/fin
    \*
    \*v
    \*v
    \*
    \*S-
    \*>V
    \*>V
    \*
    \*\*foo
    \*
    \*thru
    \*
    \*strophe
    \*
    \*^
    \*
    \*S/1
    \*S/2
    B
    1
    2
    \*
    \*S/fin
    \*S/fin
    \*
    \*v
    \*v
    \*
    \*S-
    \*
    \*\*bar
    \*
    \*thru
    C
    refrain
    \*
    \*strophe
    \*
    \*^
    \*
    \*S/1.1
    \*S/2.1
    B
    1
    2
    \*
    \*S/fin
    \*S/fin
    \*
    \*v
    \*v
    \*
    \*S-
    \*>Coda
    \*>Coda
    \*
    \*\*foo
    \*
    \*thru
    E
    i
    \*-
    \*-

The command:

    `` strophe file``

will produce the following output: ````

    !! \`strophe' example.
    \*\*example
    \*\*bar
    \*thru
    \*thru
    \*>A
    \*>A
    A
    i
    \*>V
    \*>V
    \*
    \*\*foo
    \*
    \*thru
    B
    1
    \*
    \*\*bar
    \*
    \*thru
    C
    refrain
    B
    1
    \*>V
    \*>V
    \*
    \*\*foo
    \*
    \*thru
    B
    2
    \*
    \*\*bar
    \*
    \*thru
    C
    refrain
    B
    2
    \*>Coda
    \*>Coda
    \*
    \*\*foo
    \*
    \*thru
    E
    i
    \*-
    \*-

--------------

PORTABILITY
~~~~~~~~~~~

DOS 2.0 and up, with the MKS Toolkit. OS/2 with the MKS Toolkit. UNIX
systems supporting the *Korn* shell or *Bourne* shell command
interpreters, and revised *awk* (1985).

--------------

SEE ALSO
~~~~~~~~

``  extract (4),  thru (4), *strophe (2),  yank (4)``

--------------

| 

-  `**Pertinent description in the Humdrum User
   Guide** <../guide20.html#The_strophe_Command>`__
-  `**Index to Humdrum Commands** <../commands.toc.html>`__
-  `**Table for Contents for Humdrum User Guide** <../guide.toc.html>`__

| 

.. | | image:: /Humdrum/HumdrumIcon.gif
.. |Humdrum | image:: /Humdrum/HumdrumHeader.gif
.. | | image:: /Humdrum/HumdrumSpacer.gif
.. | | image:: /Humdrum/HumdrumIcon.gif
.. | | image:: /Humdrum/HumdrumSpacer.gif
