
========================================================
Chapter 6: Representing Music Using ***kern*(II)
========================================================

In this chapter we return to consider several more advanced topics related to
the \*\*kern representation.


Tuplets
=======

As we saw in `Chapter 2,`_ \*\*kern durations are represented using a
reciprocal number notation. With the exception of the value zero, durations
are represented by reciprocal numerical values corresponding to the American
duration names: "1" for whole note, "8" for eighth, "32" for thirty-second,
etc. The number zero (0) is reserved for the breve duration (a duration of
twice the length of a whole note).

Dotted durations are indicated by adding the period character (.) immediately
following the numerical value, hence "``8.``" signifies a dotted eighth-note
and "``2..``" signifies a doubly dotted half-note. Any number of augmentation
dots may follow the duration integer.

Triplet and other irregular durations are represented using the same
reciprocal logic. Consider, for example, the quarter-note triplet duration.
Three quarter triplets occur in the time of four quarters or one whole
duration. If we divide a whole duration ("``1``") into three equal parts,
each part has a duration of one-third. The corresponding reciprocal integer
for 1/3 is 3, hence \*\*kern represents a quarter-note triplet as a "third-
note", ``3``. Similarly, eighth-note triplets are represented by the integer
6 and sixteenth-note triplets are represented by the integer 12. Eighth-note
quintuplets (5 in the time of 4) will be represented by the value 10 (a half
duration divided by 5).

In general, the way to determine the \*\*kern equivalent of an arbitrary
"tuplet" duration is to multiply the number of tuplets by the total duration
which they occupy. If 7 notes of equal duration occupy the duration of a
whole-note ("``1``"), then each septuplet is represented by the value 7 (i.e.
1 x 7). A more extreme example is 23 notes in the time of a doubly dotted
quarter. The appropriate \*\*kern duration can be found by multiplying 4 by
23 (equals 92) and adding the appropriate augmentation dots. Thus "92.." is
the correct \*\*kern encoding for a note whose duration is 23 notes in the
time of a doubly-dotted quarter.

By way of illustration, example 6.1 shows an excerpt from Sigfrid Karg-
Elert's *Caprices* Op. 107, No. 23 for solo flute. The work is in 3/4 meter.
The last beat of the first measure has 9 notes in the time of a quarter
duration. The reciprocal encoding is 9 x 4 or 36th notes.

**Example 6.1.** Karg-Elert, *Caprices* Op. 107, No. 23.

> .. image:: guide.figures/ch06.1a.gif
.. image:: guide.figures/ch06.1b.gif

>
|  ``**kern
|  *clefG2
|  *k[f#c#g#d#]
|  *M3/4
|  =
|  (8f#
|  8e#
|  4en)
|  (36d#
|  36e#
|  36c#
|  36a
|  36f##
|  36g#
|  36dd#
|  36aa
|  36cc#
|  =
|  8b~
|  8a#~
|  4an)
|  (20gg#
|  20ff#
|  20dd#
|  20cc#
|  20a
|  =
|  8g#)
|  (40b
|  40a#
|  40an
|  40e
|  40dd#
|  8g#)
|  (40b
|  40a#
|  40an
|  40e
|  40dd#
|  20g#)
|  *-``

Another set of tuplets appears in the last beat of the second measure. In
this case, five notes are played in the time of a quarter, hence the
reciprocal durations are 5 x 4 or 20th notes.

In the last measure of the example, five notes are played in the time of an
eighth-note: 5 x 8 or 40th notes. Note that the 40th notes are half the
duration of the 20th notes in the previous measure.

Other noteworthy observations regarding example 6.1: notice the tenuto
markings (``~``) on the first two notes of the second measure. Also notice
that the duration of the last note in the example is indeterminate. It could
be a sixteenth note, a quintuplet sixteenth, or some other duration.


Grace Notes, Gruppettos and Appoggiaturas
-----------------------------------------

The \*\*kern representation also allows for the encoding of grace notes
(acciaccaturas, non-canonical gruppettos, and appoggiaturas.

Depending on the expected analytic application, one way to handle these
notational devices is to encode the notes according to the manner in which
they are typically performed. Alternatively, since the component notes of an
expanded ornament are viewed as embellishments that hold potentially less
analytic status, a special designation for these notes can be useful for
certain types of studies.

*Grace notes* (acciaccaturas) are visually rendered as miniature notes with a
slash drawn through the stem. In the \*\*kern representation these notes
are treated as "durationless" notes and are designated by the lower-case
letter "``q``". Hence, the token "``G#q``" denotes a G#3 grace note with an
indeterminate duration.

Non-canonical *gruppettos* are miniature (non-cue) notes (typically appearing
in groups) whose stems do not contain a slash, and whose notated durations
cause the total notated duration for the measure to exceed the prevailing
meter. These gruppetto notes are encoded as notes retaining their notated
durations, but all such notes are also designated by the upper-case letter
"``Q``". Hence, a miniature sixteenth-note middle C would be encoded as
"``16cQ``".

When processed by various tools in the Humdrum Toolkit, these notes may be
treated as equivalent to their notated durations. Alternatively, in some
types of processing these notes may be discarded. For example, the Humdrum
`**timebase**`_ command (described in `Chapter 13)`_ eliminates acciaccaturas
and gruppetto notes. Note that data records containing acciaccaturas or
gruppetto notes must *not* also include normal notes.

In the case of *appoggiaturas,* \*\*kern requires that they be encoded as
performed. An appropriate duration is assigned to the appoggiatura according
to common performance practice. The duration of the subsequent note is
reduced by a corresponding amount. The status of the two notes forming the
appoggiatura is nevertheless marked. The appoggiatura note itself is
designated by the upper-case letter "``P``", whereas the subsequent note
(whose notated duration has been shortened) is designated by the lower-case
letter "``p``".


Multiple Stops
--------------

In the \*\*kern representation, spines typically represent individual
musical parts or voices. Occasionally, a nominally single "part" contains
more than one concurrent note. A good example of such a situation occurs when
a violin plays a double stop.

The \*\*kern representation provides three different ways of representing
such situations: (1) multiple stops, (2) spine splitting and rejoining, and
(3) introduction and retiring of a momentary "part". Each of these
representation methods captures a different way of interpreting the music.
The best representation will depend on the editorial or processing goal.

First we will consider the generic Humdrum *subtoken.* A data token becomes a
multiple stop when two or more subtokens are present, separated by single
spaces. By way of illustration, the following \*\*kern data represents a
scale played in ascending thirds:



> ``**kern
> 4c 4e
> 8d 8f
> 8e 8g
> 8f 8a
> 8g 8b
> 8a 8cc
> 8b 8dd
> 4cc 4ee
> *-``

An important restriction for multiple stops in the \*\*kern representation
is that they must encode notes of the same duration. In the above example,
the left and right components of the multiple stop always share the same
duration. (Note that this is a restriction of multiple stops in the
\*\*kern representation only, and does not necessarily apply to other
Humdrum representations.)

Notice that multiple stops are represented with a single spine (that is,
there are no tabs present).

Multiple stops may occur at any point in a \*\*kern spine. For example, the
following \*\*kern data represents a scale that begins and ends with
chords:



> ``**kern
> 4c 4e 4g
> 8d
> 8e
> 8f
> 8g
> 8a
> 8b
> 4cc 4ee 4gg 4ccc
> *-``

The first chord has been encoded as a triple stop, whereas the last chord has
been encoded as a quadruple stop. Notice once again that all of the notes
within a multiple stop must have the same duration. If the durations of the
concurrent notes differ, then one must use Humdrum spine path indicators (see
below).

Example 6.2 illustrates a musical context where multiple stops may be
appropriate. The sample passage is from a keyboard work by Telemann. The work
is almost entirely in two parts with only occasional chords. Since the chords
always contain notes of equal duration, they can be encoded as double stops
within a single part.

**Example 6.2.** Telemann, *Kleine Fantasien fur Klavier* No. 7.

> .. image:: guide.figures/ch06.2.gif

>
|  ``**kern**kern
|  *clefF4*clefG2
|  *k[f#c#g#]*k[f#c#g#]
|  *M4/4*M4/4
|  !! Allegro
|  =2=2
|  2r12b
|  ``.12e
|  ``.12b
|  ``.12b
|  ``.12e
|  ``.12b
|  4E 4G#4b
|  4AA 4A4cc#
|  =3=3
|  12C#12ee
|  12E12cc#
|  12A12a
|  12D12ff#
|  12F#12dd
|  12A12a
|  12C#12ee
|  12E12cc#
|  12A12a
|  12D12ff#
|  12F#12dd
|  12A12a
|  =4=4
|  6C#12ee
|  ``.12dd
|  12A12cc#
|  6BB12dd
|  ``.12cc#
|  12G#12b
|  4AA12cc#
|  ``.12b
|  ``.12cc#
|  6C#12a
|  ``.12cc#
|  12E12b
|  =5=5
|  *-*-``

When encoding multiple stops in the \*\*kern representation, some note
attributes should be encoded for each note in the multiple stop, whereas
other markings should be encoded only once for the entire multiple stop.
Note-related attributes such as articulation marks, stem directions, and ties
should be encoded for each note in the multiple stop. By contrast, phrase
marks, slurs, and beamings should be encoded once for the entire multiple
stop. Example 6.3 provides a contrived example that illustrates these
conventions. Notice that the first double stop encodes a single open phrase
(i.e. ``{``') and the last double stop encodes a single close phrase
(``}``'). Similarly, the slur in the middle of the phrase has been encoded
once. However, the staccato markings have been encoded for both notes in each
of the double stops. Similarly, separate ties have been encoded for both
notes in the double stop.

**Example 6.3.** Attribute encoding for \*\*kern multiple stops.

> ``**kern
> {4c 4e
> 8dL 8f
> 8eJ 8g
> (8f' 8a'
> 8g' 8b')
> 8.a 8.ccL
> 16b 16ddk
> [4cc [4ee
> 4cc] 4ee]}
> *-``


Further Examples
----------------

Example 6.4 shows an excerpt from a Chopin *Etude* that illustrates a number
of subtle features in the \*\*kern representation.

The opening measure consists solely of gruppetto notes; each has been
designated by the upper-case letter `Q'. The double-barline has been
indicated with two thin lines. Two tandem interpretations encode the meter
signature (``*M3/4``) and the tempo (``*MM66``). Note that metronome markings
using the ``*MM`` interpretation are always given in quarter-durations per
minute. If the metronome marking had been given as half-note equals 48, then
the tempo interpretation would be given as ``*MM96`` -- i.e. quarter-note
equals 96 beats per minute.

Two grace-notes are evident in the passage. The first occurs just after the
double-bar, and the second occurs three measures later. These notes have been
encoded with duration values, but are designated by the lower-case letter
``q``'. Notice that grace-notes are always treated as "durationless" notes.
Grace notes must always be encoded on a separate data record. Concurrent
grace notes can be encoded on the same data record, but grace notes must
never share the same data record with a regular note. Another peculiarity of
grace notes is that they are always assumed to be slurred to the ensuing note
(if there is a subsequent note). Thus slurs should not be encoded as part of
the grace note.

The grace-note E-natural coincides with the end of the first phrase and the
beginning of the second phrase. The phrases are said to be "elided"
(overlapping). Since \*\*kern phrases are represented by open and close
braces, the ampersand character is used to indicate elisions.

Notice that the "inner" accompaniment chords have been encoded as double
stops. This is possible because the notes in these double stops are all the
same duration.

Finally, notice how the triplet eighth-notes (encoded as duration "12") have
been interleaved with the concurrent eighth-note figures so that the onsets
are ordered in the correct temporal sequence.

**Example 6.4.** Chopin, *Etude* Op. 25, No. 7.

.. code-block:: kern
   !! Lento
   **kern       **kern          **kern
   *staff2      *staff1         *staff1
   *clefF4      *clefG2         *clefG2
   {4GG#Q       .               .
   4.D#Q        .               .
   8C#Q         .               .
   8C#Q         .               .
   8BB#Q        .               .
   4.AQ         .               .
   8G#Q         .               .
   16F##Q       .               .
   16G#Q        .               .
   16AQ         .               .
   16G#Q        .               .
   16BnQ        .               .
   16AQ         .               .
   16EQ         .               .
   16E#Q        .               .
   16F#Q        .               .
   16E#Q        .               .
   16G#Q        .               .
   16F#Q        .               .
   16AQ         .               .
   16G#Q        .               .
   16C#Q        .               .
   16D#Q        .               .
   =||          =||             =||
   *MM66        *MM66           *MM66
   *M3/4        *M3/4           *M3/4
   &{(Enq}      .               .
   2e)          8r              2.r
   8g#          8cc#            .
   8g#          8cc#            .
   8g#          8cc#            .
   8.d#         8g#             8cc#
   8g#          8cc#            .
   16c#         .               .
   =3           =3              =3
   4..          cc#             8e 8a{2ee
   .            8e              8a.
   8e           8a              .
   8e           8a              .
   32d#         .               .
   32c#         .               .
   8e           8a              8.dd#
   .            8e              8a.
   .            .               16cc#
   =4           =4              =4
   [4A8d#       8f#             4cc#
   .            8d#             8f#.
   16A]         8d#             8f#4b#
   16G#         .               .
   16F##        8d#             8f#.
   16G#         .               .
   16Bn         8d#             8f#4cc#
   16A          .               .
   16F#         8d#             8f#.
   16D#         .               .
   =5           =5              =5
   4BB#}        8d#             8f#4dd#
   .            8d#             8f#.
   8r           8d#             8f#4..g#}
   {16FF##      ^8d#            8f#.
   16GG#        .               .
   BBnq         .               .
   16AA         8B#             8f#.
   16GG#        .               .
   16C#         8B#             8f#.
   16D#         .               {16g#
   =6           =6              =6
   4E           8r              4g#
   .            8c#             .
   4CC#}        8c#             8e4cc#
   .            8c#             8e.
   (8.G#        8c#             8e4bn
   .            8c#             8e.
   16.G#        .               .
   =7           =7              =7
   4G#)         8c#             8e4b
   .            8c#             8e.
   (12FF#       8c#             8e4a
   12C#         .               .
   .            8c#             8e.
   12F#         .               .
   12G#         8c#             8e4g#
   12B          .               .
   .            8c#             8e.
   12A          .               .
   =8           =8              =8
   *-           *-              *-


Reprise
-------

This chapter completes our survey of the \*\*kern representation. We have
noted an number of subtleties related to encoding tuplets, multiple stops,
gruppettos, acciaccaturas, elided phrases, and spine path changes.

A more complete description of the \*\*kern_ representation may be found
in the *Humdrum Reference Manual.*

--------


