=======================================
Chapter 38: Systematic Musicology
=======================================


Much of music research centers on the task of describing things. A researcher
might offer a description of "House" style, or Wagner's orchestration,
commonalities in themes by Respighi, or a Balinese variation technique. Good
descriptions are based on the identification of *features*. A "feature" is a
notable or characteristic part of something -- something that helps to
distinguish one thing from another thing (or one group of things from another
group of things).

Not all truthful descriptions qualify as distinctive features. Imagine that
you were robbed by someone and were later asked by the police to provide a
description of your assailant. Suppose you began your description by saying
that the robber had a nose, a mouth, and two eyes. These facts would
undoubtedly be true, but the police would be rightly dismayed by your
description for the simple reason that the facts fail to distinguish your
assilant from billions of potential suspects.

When characterizing a musical work, genre, style, or composer, it is
important, not simply to make truthful observations. It is also important to
identify those characteristics that distinguish the work, genre, style, or
composer from others. If the goal of an analytic description is to convey
what is unique or characteristic of a given object or class of objects, then
good features must embody or define some of that distinctiveness. That is,
the research must guard against describing something that is commonplace.

In this chapter, we will describe several methods to help researchers
determine whether a presumed feature is distinctive. In essence, we will ask
the following question: "How likely is it that this is a feature of some
larger class of objects -- like the class of all musical works?" If the
feature is commonly found in many situations, then we are not justified in
claiming that the feature is unique to a particular situation.

In order to determine whether a proposed feature is distinctive of a work, we
need to compare the incidence of occurrence with a body of works where we
wouldn't expect the feature to be so common. In systematic musicology, we say
we are looking for a comparison or *control* sample. There are four basic
approaches to establishing a control sample:

-   comparison repertory
-   randomizing
-   counter-balancing
-   autophase procedure


Comparison Repertory
--------------------

By a "comparison repertory" we mean a group of works, that we hypothesize do
not show the same distinctive feature -- although in other respects the works
are similar.

Suppose a scholar has observed a particular feature that appears to occur
frequently in the music of Respighi. Is this pattern a characteristic feature
of Respighi's music? We cannot know this by looking only at the music of
Respighi. We must choose a comparison repertory and show that the same
feature is not common in the comparison group.

Ideally, the researcher should choose a comparison repertory that is as
similar as possible to the target repertory. For example, if we found that
Respighi's music contrasted with Rameau's music, we would not be able to
dismiss the possibility that the observed differences arise because of
differences in nationality, or differences in stylistic period, or
differences in instrumentation, etc. Choosing a similar composer would be a
better test of the proposed feature.

Of course it is almost never possible to select a perfectly matched
comparison group. When selecting a comparison repertory, the researcher
should make a list of possible confounds. For example, the feature might be

In more careful studies, the researcher might attempt to match the
repertories for a series of attributes. For example, one might match the
number of works in both repertories that are in triple meters. Similarly, one
might match the modality so both the target and comparison repertories have
the same proportion of major/minor keys. One might similarly match
instrumentation, date or period of composition, duration of work, tempi, and
so on.

Humdrum users can use the **find** and **grep** commands to identify works
that match particular controlled characteristics (see `Chapter 33`_). For
example, the following command might locate all files that contain scores in
triple meter. The results are placed in a file called ``control``:

`` find /scores -type f -exec grep -l '!!!AMT.*triple' "{}" ";" \
>
>> > control``

In some cases, the number of possible control works is excessively large. In
this case one can make a random selection from the control list using the
`**scramble**`_ command described later.

Note that in many instances it is difficult to establish a good comparison
repertory. For example, suppose we find significant differences between
Beethoven melodies and Kanartic folk melodies. How should we interpret these
differences? The differences might be symptomatic of the difference between
folk music and classical music. Or the differences might reflect differences
between German and Indian music. Or the differences might reflect differences
between early 19th century music and mid-twenthieth century music. Or the
differences might be attributable to differences of instrumentation.

No matter what comparison repertory we choose, someone might be able to claim
that any observed differences arise due to some other factor. For example, we
might compare early and late works by Bach as a way of tracing his musical
development. However, someone might claim that any differences found are not
related to Bach's development as a composer, but are due to different tastes
in Weimar versus Leipzig. Bach was simply showing his ability to adapt to
local tastes.


Randomizing
-----------

Sometimes scholars formulate hypotheses that are intended to pertain to the
whole of music -- that is, the feature is thought to be a musical universal.
In these cases it may be impossible to identify a comparison repertory.

Many theorists have noticed, for example, that melodies tend to be composed
predominantly of small intervals. That is, there appears to be a preference
for small melodic intervals in most forms of music. Unfortunately, the
predominance of small intervals might simply be an artifact of a small range.
Consider the case of a melody that is restricted to the range of an octave.
Between any two pitches, there is only a single instance of a 12-semitone
interval, however, there are 12 possible 1-semitone intervals. Even in a
random ordering of notes, one would expect to see a preponderance of small
intervals.

So is there any way of testing whether composers really do favor small
melodic intervals? Or is this simply an artifact of range restrictions? Many
such hypotheses can be tested using a randomizing procedure. We can
illustrate this procedure by working through the problem of small melodic
intervals.

We begin by measuring the average melodic interval size in semitones for a
sample of actual melodies. We can use the `**semits**`_ command to translate
data to semitone representations and then use the `**xdelta**`_ command to
calculate numerical differences. The **-a** option for **xdelta** causes only
absolute (unsigned) values to be calculated. The `**rid**`_ command can be
used to eliminate everything but data records and the **grep** command can be
used to eliminate barlines and rests. We can then calculate the average
interval size by piping the output to the **stats** command. For typical folk
melodies, the average interval size is roughly two semitones.

`` semits melody | xdelta -a | rid -GLId | grep -v '[=r]' | stats``

Next, we need to determine the average melodic interval size that would
result for a random re-ordering of the pitches within each melody. We can do
this using the Humdrum **scramble** command.


Using the *scramble* Command
--------

The `**scramble**`_ command is useful for randomizing the arrangement of
Humdrum data. Suppose we had the following Humdrum input:

`` **numbers
`` 1
`` 2
`` 3
`` 4
`` 5
`` *-``

We can scramble the order of data records using the following command:

`` scramble -r numbers``

The **-r** option indicates that it is the order of records which should be
randomized. A possible output might look like this:

`` **numbers
`` 3
`` 2
`` 5
`` 1
`` 4
`` *-``

Notice that only data records are scrambled: comments and interpretations
stay put. Each time `**scramble**`_ is invoked, it produces a different
random ordering.

Returning to our melodic interval problem, we can now generate an inventory
of melodic intervals for our original repertory, where the order of the notes
has been randomly ordered:

`` scramble -r melody | semits | xdelta -a | rid -GLId \
>
>> | grep -v '[=r]' | stats``

For a typical folksong repertory, the average melodic interval size for a
randomly re-ordered melody is roughly 3 semitones in size. Using common
statistical tests, it is possible to prove that this difference is unlikely
to occur by chance and that it likely is a symptom of real efforts to
organize melodies using relatively small melodic intervals.

A similar approach can be used to address innumerable questions. For example,
in Haydn's music, it seems that Haydn tends to avoid following the dominant
by a subdominant chord (i.e., *V-IV*). On the other hand, Haydn's use of the
*IV* chord is comparatively infrequent, so the apparent absence of this
progression may simply be an artifact of the relative scarcity of subdominant
chords. We can address this question by comparing Haydn's actual harmonic
progressions with randomly generated progressions. First we count the total
number of *V-IV* progressions:

`` extract -i '**harm' haydn | context -n 2 -o ^= | grep -c '^V IV$'``

Next we randomly re-order his harmonies and count the number of *V-IV*
progressions:

`` scramble -r haydn | extract -i '**harm' | context -n 2 -o ^= | grep -c
'^V IV$'``

In some cases, problems can be addressed by randomizing one part of voice
with respect to another. For example, there is strong evidence that Bach uses
more augmented eleventh harmonic intervals than would occur by chance. That
is, the tritone is "sought-out" rather than "avoided" in his writing. Suppose
we are looking at a two-part invention. We begin by counting the number of
augmented elevenths in his actual writing:

`` ditto -s = bach | hint | grep -c 'A11'``

We can create a random comparison by extracting one of the parts, scrambling
the order of notes, and then re-assembling the scrambled part with the
original. The resulting harmonic intervals arise from a random juxtaposition
of parts.

`` extract -f 1 bach > temp1``
`` extract -f 2 bach > temp2``
`` scramble -r temp1 > temp1.scr``
`` assemble temp1.scr temp2 | ditto -s = | hint | grep -c 'A11'``

Note that the **scramble** command also provides a **-t** option so that the
order of tokens within a data record can be randomly re-arranged.


Retrograde Controls Using the *tac* Command
--------

Suppose a theorist found an unusually large number of occurrences of the
B-A-C-H pitch pattern in some repertory. Are these patterns intentional on
the part of the composer? Or should we expect a fair number of such patterns
to occur simply by chance?

One way of determining the chance frequency of B-A-C-H might be to randomize
the order of pitches using the `**scramble**`_ command, and then use
`**patt**`_ to count the number of occurrences in the reordered melodies.
Unfortunately, we already know that musical lines tend to be constructed
using small intervals, and the pitches B-A-C-H are very close together. Since
random reordering of the pitches will reduce the proportion of small
intervals, we would naturally expect fewer instances of B-A-C-H in the random
musical lines. We need some way to maintain the identical interval
distribution in our control repertory.

One way to do this is by *reversing* the sequencial order of the notes. If we
could rearrange the notes so that the first note was last and the last note
was first, then our control repertory would preserve both the frequency of
occurrence of all the pitches, and also preserve the pitch-proximity
distribution.

The UNIX **tac** command can be used to reverse the order of records. Suppose
we had an input consisting of the number 1 through 10 on successive lines.
The **tac** command would transform this input so that the output consists of
the reverse ordering of numbers from 10 to 1.

If we apply **tac** to a Humdrum file, then the result will no longer conform
to the Humdrum syntax -- the spine-path terminators will appear at the
beginning of the file and the exclusive interpretations will appear at the
end of the file. If we use **tac** we could simply restore the correct syntax
by hand-editing the file and moving the exclusive interpretations and the
spine-path terminators to their proper locations. We now have a "retrograde"
passage.

Such a retrograde passage will provide a useful control repertory to test our
B-A-C-H hypothesis. If a composer is intentionally composing several
instances of B-A-C-H into his/her music, then we would expect the number of
occurrences to be somewhat more frequent than instances of B-A-C-H found in
retrograde versions of the works.

Another way of testing the same hypothesis would be to search for the reverse
pitch sequence: H-C-A-B.


Autophase Procedure
-------------------

Frequently researchers are interested in the relationship between concurrent
musical parts or voices. Suppose, for example, that we had reason to suspect
that a particular polyphonic composer tends to actively avoid octave
intervals between the bass and soprano voices. If we find that the proportion
of octave intervals is 6 percent, how do we know whether this is a lot or a
little?

One approach to answering this question is to use an *autophase procedure*
(Huron, 1991a). The essence of this approach is to shift two spines with
respect to each other.

Recall that the `**reihe**`_ command (`Chapter 35`_) provides a **-s** option
that causes a shift in the serial position of data tokens. For example,
suppose we had an input consisting of the numbers 1 through 5. The following
command:

`` reihe -s +1* file*``

Will cause all data tokens to be moved forward one position, and the last
data token to be moved to the beginning:

`` **numbers
`` 5
`` 1
`` 2
`` 3
`` 4
`` *-``

Let's apply this technique to our problem of whether a given composer tends
to avoid octaves between the soprano and bass voices. First, we extract each
of the voices. Let's also eliminate barlines and use `**ditto**`_ to
replicate the pitch values through null tokens.

`` extract -i '*sopran' composition | grep -v = | ditto > voice1``
`` extract -i '*bass' composition | grep -v = | ditto > voice2``

Now let's shift one part with respect to the other using `**reihe**`_ **-s**.

`` reihe -s voice1 > voice1.shifted``

Now we reassemble the parts, determine the harmonic intervals present, and
count the number of octave intervals:

`` assemble voice2 voice1.shifted | hint | grep -c 'P8'``

In effect, we have concocted a control group, by shifting the parts with
respect to each other. Of course we have utterly destroyed the *relationship
between the two parts.* However, many things remain untouched. The bass voice
remains identical, and the soprano voice is identical except that there is an
extra melodic interval (between the first and last notes) and one melodic
interval missing. In short, we have preserved the within-voice organization
while destroying the between-voice organization.

Rather than using a single shifted control, it is typically better to repeat
the procedure, methodically shifting the spines through a complete 360 degree
rotation. We can then compare measures for the actual work with a
distribution of measures for all of the shifted values.

The following script calculates the number of P8 intervals for each of the
possible shifts between the first and second spines in the file
`` composition``. The number of data records is determined and assigned to the
`` LENGTH`` variable. A ``while`` loop is used to calculate the number of
octave intervals for each of the possible shifts between the parts:

`` extract -f 1 composition | grep -v = | ditto > spine1
extract -f 2 composition | grep -v = | ditto > spine2
LENGTH=`rid -GLId spine1 | wc -l | sed 's/ //g'`
X=0
while [ $X -ne $LENGTH ]
do
>
>> reihe -s $X spine1 > temp
assemble temp spine2 | hint | grep -c 'P8'
let X=$X+1
>
> done
rm spine[12] temp
````
$ 

This *autophase* procedure has been used to address many differ kinds of
questions pertaining to how musical parts interrelate.

--------


Reprise
-------

When using computers to measure or observe something it is important not to
jump to conclusions from what we find. Just because something is either
prevalent or rare does not mean that it is significant: it might be prevalent
or rare simply by chance (e.g., von Hippel & Huron, MS). In this chapter we
have illustrated a number of methods for testing hypotheses by contrasting a
target repertory with various controlled data.

We have discussed four different control methods: comparison repertory,
randomizing, retrograde, and the autophase procedure. In addition, one might
use musical inversion as a control method. All of these methods allow us to
compare how music is actually organized with how it might be organized. In
certain cases, such contrasts allow us to infer aspects of musical
organization that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to decipher.

