=========================
Chapter 8: The Shell (I)
=========================


When you type commands, they are interpreted by a command *shell.* The shell
is a program that interprets user commands before passing them along to be
executed. Command shells are quite sophisticated and provide a number of
useful features. Although there is a lot to learn about shells, we will
explore only those features that facilitate use of Humdrum. This chapter is
the first of four chapters scattered throughout this book where we will pause
and examine some of the more pertinent and valuable features of the shell.

In UNIX environments, many different shells have been developed over the
years. The original UNIX shell was the *C-shell* -- a shell whose syntax is
similar to the C programming language. A later shell was developed by Stephen
Bourne and is known as the *Bourne shell.* Subsequent improvements by David
Korn resulted in the *Korn shell.* The Bourne shell was improved in light of
many features introduced in the Korn shell, and resulted in the *Bourne Again
Shell* -- known as *Bash*. The Korn and Bash shells are the most popular and
powerful of the current generation of shells. Although they were originally
developed for the UNIX operating system, these shells are also available for
DOS, Macintosh, Windows, Windows 98 and many other operating systems.

Shells themselves are advanced programming languages that provide complex
control structures. When you type a command, you are already writing a
program -- although most of your programs are just one line in length.


Shell Special Characters
------------------------

The shell interprets a number of characters in a special manner. When you
type a command, you should know that most shells treat the following
characters as having a special meaning: the octothorpe (#), the dollar-sign
($), the semicolon (;), the ampersand (&), the verticule (|), the asterisk
(*), the apostrophe ('), the greve (`), the greater-than sign (>), the less-
than sign (<), the question-mark (?), the double-quote ("), and the backslash
(\). We'll consider the function of each of these characters one at a time.


File Redirection (>)
--------------------

Some of the special shell characters have already been discussed. The
greater-than-sign (>) is a *file redirection operator.* It must be followed
by a user-specified filename; any output from the preceding command is placed
in the specified file. For example, the following command sorts the file
``inputfile`` and places the sorted result in the file named ``outputfile``:

``sort inputfile > outputfile``

If the file ``outputfile`` already existed, its contents will be destroyed
and over-written with the new output. Be careful not to assign the output to
the same file as the input, since this will destroy the original input file.

Sometimes it is useful to *add* the results of an operation to some already
existing file. The double greater-than-sign (>>) causes the new output to be
appended to any data already in the named file. For example, the following
command sorts the file ``inputfile`` and adds the sorted lines to the end of
the file named ``outputfile``. If the ``outputfile`` does not already exist,
the command will create it.

``sort inputfile >> outputfile``


Pipe (|)
--------

The vertical bar (|) is interpreted by the shell as a `pipe.' Pipes are used
to join the output of one command to the input of a subsequent command. For
example, in the following construction, the output of ``command1`` is routed
as the input to ``command2``:

``command1 | command2``

There is no practical limit to the length of a pipeline. Several pipes can be
used to connect successive outputs to ensuing commands:

``command1 | command2 | command3 | command4``


Shell Wildcard (*)
------------------

The asterisk is interpreted by the shell as a "filename wildcard." When it
appears by itself, the asterisk is `expanded' by the shell to a list of all
files in the current directory (in alphabetical order). For example, if the
current directory contained just three files: ``alice``, ``barry`` and
``chris`` -- then the following command would be applied to all three files
in consecutive order:

``command * > people``

The file expansion occurs at the moment when the command is invoked. So
although the file ``people`` is added to the current directory, it is not
included as its own input. However, if the above command was executed a
second time, then the file expansion would include ``people`` -- even as the
file itself is over-written to receive the output. Including the output file
as input is never a good idea.


Comment (#)
-----------

The octothorpe character (#) indicates a shell *comment*. Any characters
following the # (up to the end of the line) are simply ignored by the shell.
The following is not a command:

``#grep OTL: filename``

The comment can begin anywhere in the line. Here the comment begins after the
filename:

``grep OTL: filename # (Search for Humdrum titles.)``


Escape Character (\)
--------------------

Sometimes we would like to have a special character treated literally. For
example, suppose we wanted to search for records containing sharps in a
```**kern``_ file. The following command will not work because the shell
will insist on interpreting the octothorpe as beginning a comment:

``grep # filename``

There are several ways to "turn off" the special meaning of a character. The
simplest way is to precede the character by a backslash (\) as in the
following command:

``grep \# filename``

The backslash character itself can be treated literally by preceding it with
another backslash. For example, the following command searches for down-stems
in a ``**kern`` file:

``grep \\ filename``


Escape Quotations (``'...``')
--

Another way of escaping the special meaning of shell characters is to place
the material in single quotes. For example, we can escape the meaning of the
octothorpe (#) by preceding and following it by single quotes:

``grep '#' filename``

Single quotes are especially useful for binding spaces. For example, the
following command searches for the phrase "Lennon and McCartney" in a file
named ``beatles``:

``grep 'Lennon and McCartney' beatles``

If the single quotes are omitted, the command means something completely
different. The following command searches for the string "Lennon" in three
files named ``and``, ``McCartney`` and ``beatles``:

``grep Lennon and McCartney beatles``

A common mistake is to fail to match quotation marks in a command. The shell
will assume that the command is incomplete until all quotation marks are
matched (both single quotes and double quotes). In the following example, we
have failed to match the quotation mark. When we press the return key, the
shell responds with a change of prompt indicating that it is waiting for us
to complete the command.

``grep '# inputfile > outputfile
>``


Command Delimiter (;)
---------------------

The semicolon (;) indicates the end of a command. Its presence allows more
than one command to be typed on a single line. For example, the following
line:

``command1 ; command2``

is logically identical to:

``command1``
``command2``

When both commands appear on the same line, they are still executed
sequentially, so the second command doesn't begin until the first is
completed. Although the ability to place two or more commands on a single
line may seem redundant, there are a number of circumstances where this
feature proves useful.


Background Command (&)
-

After typing a command, the command begins executing as soon as you type the
carriage return or "enter" key. When the command has finished executing, the
shell will display a new command prompt. Sometimes a command can take a long
time to execute so it will be awhile before the prompt is displayed again.
Unfortunately, you must wait for the prompt before you can type a new
command. On multitasking systems it is possible for the computer to execute
more than one command concurrently. The ampersand (&) can be used to execute
a command as a *background process*. When a command is ended by an ampersand,
the shell creates an independent process to handle the command, and the shell
immediately returns with a prompt for a new command from the user. UNIX
systems provide sophisticated mechanisms for controlling concurrent
processing of commands. For further information concerning these features,
refer to a UNIX reference book.


Shell Command Syntax
--------------------

Shell commands follow a special syntax. There are six possible components to
a common command:

-   the command name,
-   one or more options,
-   one or more option parameters,
-   a command argument,
-   one or more input file names,
-   output redirection.

Each of these components is separated by `blank space' (tabs or spaces). A
command begins with the command name -- such as **uniq**, **sort**, or
`**pitch**.`_ A command argument is a special requirement of only some
commands. A good example of a command argument is the search pattern given to
the **grep** command. In the following command, **grep** is the command name,
"Lennon" is the command argument and ``beatles`` is the input file name:

``grep Lennon beatles``

For most commands, it is possible to process more than one input file. These
files are simply listed at the end of the command. For example, the following
**grep** command searches for the string "McCartney" in the file ``beatles``
and in the file ``wings``:

``grep McCartney beatles wings``

Most commands provide *options* that modify the behavior of the command in
some way. Command options are designated by a leading dash character. The
specific option is usually indicated by a single alphabetic letter, such as
the **-b** option (spoken: "dash-B" option). In the **uniq** command, the
**-c** option causes a count to be prepended to each output line. In the
following command, **uniq** is the command name, **-c** is the option, and
``ghana32`` is the name of the input file:

``uniq -c ghana32``

In many cases, the option is followed by a *parameter* that specifies further
information pertaining to the invoked option. In the following command,
`**recode**`_ is the command name, **-f** is the option, **reassign** is the
parameter used by the **-f** option, and **gagaku** is the name of the input
file:

``recode -f reassign gagaku``

Options and their accompanying parameters must be separated by blank space
(i.e. one or more spaces and/or tabs). If more than one option is invoked,
and none of the invoked options require a parameter, then the option-letters
may be combined. For example, the **-a** and **-b** options might be invoked
as **-ab** (or as **-ba)** -- provided neither option requires a parameter.

Whenever an option requires a parameter, the option must be specified alone
and followed immediately by the appropriate parameter. For example, in the
following command, the command name is `**trans**,`_ the **-d** option is
followed by the numerical parameter **3**; the parameter for the **-c**
option is the number **4** and the input file is named **gambia21**.

``trans -d 3 -c 4 gambia21``

Since numerical parameters can sometimes be negative, it can be difficult to
discern whether a negative number is a parameter or another option. In the
following example, the **-3** is a parameter to the **-d** option rather than
an option by itself.

``trans -d -3 -c 2 gambia21``


Output Redirection
------------------

Most commands support several input and output modes. Input to a command may
come from three sources. In many cases the input will come from one or more
existing files. Apart from existing files, input may also come from text
typed manually at the terminal, or from the output of preceding commands.
When input text is entered manually it must be terminated with an end-of-file
character (control-D) on a separate line. (On Microsoft operating systems the
end-of-file character is control-Z.) When input is received from preceding
commands, the output is sent via a UNIX pipe (`|') as discussed above.

The different ways of providing input to a command are illustrated in the
following examples. In the first example, the input (if any) is taken from
the terminal (keyboard). In the second example, the input is *explicitly*
taken from a file named ``input``. In the third example, the input is
*implicitly* taken from a file named ``input``. In the fourth example, the
input to **command2** comes from the output of **command1**.

``command``
``command < input``
``command input``
``command1 | command2``

Outputs produced by commands may similarly be directed to a variety of
locations. The default output from most commands is sent to the terminal
screen. Alternatively, the output can be sent to another process (i.e.
another command) using a pipe (|). Output can also be stored in a file using
file redirection operator (`>') or *added* to the end of a (potentially)
existing file using the file-append operator (`>>'). In the first example
below, the output is sent to the screen. In the second example, the output is
sent to the file ``outfile``; if the file ``outfile`` already exists, its
contents will be overwritten. In the third example, the output is appended to
the end of the file ``outfile``; if the file ``outfile`` does not already
exist, it will be created. In the fourth example, the output is sent as input
to the command **command2**.

``command
command > outfile
command >> outfile
command1 | command2``

When two or more commands have their inputs and outputs linked together using
the pipe operator (``|``), the entire command line is known as a *pipeline.*
Pipelines occur frequently in Humdrum applications.


Tee
---

A special shell command known as **tee** can be used to clone a copy of some
output, so that two identical output streams are generated. In the first
example below, the output is piped to **tee** which writes one copy of the
output to the file ``outfile`` and the second copy appears on the screen. In
the second example, the output from **command1** is split: one copy is piped
to **command2** for further processing, while an identical copy is stored in
the file ``outfile1``; if the file ``outfile1`` already exists, its contents
will be overwritten. In the third example, the append option (**-a**) for
**tee** has been invoked -- meaning that the output from ``command`` will be
added to the end of any existing data in the file ``outfile``. If the file
``outfile`` does not already exist, it will be created.

``command | tee outfile
command1 | tee outfile1 | command2 > outfile2
command | tee -a outfile``

The **tee** command is a useful way of recording or diverting some
intermediate data in the middle of a pipeline.

--------


Reprise
-------

In this chapter we have noted that the shell interprets certain characters in
a special way. We learned about the octothorpe (#), the ampersand (&), the
verticule (|), the asterisk (*), the apostrophe ('), the greater-than sign
(>), the semicolon (;), and the backslash (\). In a later chapter we'll
discuss the remaining special characters: the dollar-sign ($), the apostrophe
('), the less-than sign (<), the question-mark (?), and the double-quote ("),

We have also reviewed the syntax for UNIX commands. Commands can include
components such as the *command name*, *options*, *parameters*, *command
arguments*, *input files* and *output redirection*.

--------


