=====================================
Chapter 28: Dynamic
=====================================

In this chapter we introduce three pre-defined representations
pertaining to musical dynamics. One representation (\*\*dyn) represents
dynamic markings as they appear visually in a printed score. A second
representation (\*\*dynam) represents a rationalized interpretation of
the notated dynamic markings in a score. A third scheme (\*\*dB)
represents continuous dynamic levels in decibels.

The *\*\*dynam* and *\*\*dyn* Representations
---------------------------------------------

Musical scores commonly contain dynamic markings that include both
written text (such as "*subito forte*\ " and "*dimin.*\ ") and graphic
representations (such as hairpin or wedge-shaped crescendo markings).
Unfortunately, traditional dynamic markings are often confusing or
ambiguous. Consider, for example, the following sequence of dynamic
markings from a Beethoven piano sonata:

pp

cresc.

cresc.

p

cresc.

*pp*

What are we to make of these markings? Does the music gradually
*crescendo* from *pianissimo* to *piano*? Does this initial *crescendo*
occur in two distinct phases or does the repetition of the term
"*cresc.*\ " merely indicate a continuation of a single *crescendo*?
Does this *crescendo* move to a dynamic level above *piano* and abruptly
reduce to *piano*? Does the final *crescendo* begin at a *piano* level
and get louder -- followed by a relatively abrupt reduction to
*pianissimo*? Or does the final *crescendo* begin below *piano* and
gradually reach *pianissimo*? Such ambiguities are rampant in printed
musical scores. We can examine the accompanying musical context to help
us resolve questions of interpretation, but computers are unable to
bring such sophistication to the task.

Humdrum provides two pre-defined representations for score-related
dynamic markings. One representation
(```**dyn`` <representations/dyn.rep.html>`__) attempts to represent the
dynamic markings as they appear in a visual rendering of a score. That
is, ``**dyn`` represents the visual or orthographic information. A
second representation (```**dynam`` <representations/dynam.rep.html>`__)
provides a "rationalized" or canonical means for interpreting
score-related dynamic indications. Users will want to choose one or the
other representation depending on the analytic task being pursued.

In the first instance, ``**dynam`` uses standardized data tokens to
represent particular dynamic levels. Table 28.1 shows the standard
representations for ``**dynam``. For example, the token ``pp``
represents the concept of pianissimo, even if the visual rendering may
be *pp* or *pianissimo* or *pianiss.*, etc.

**Table 28.1.**

.. csv-table::
	
	p,	"piano"
	pp,	"pianissimo"
	ppp,	"triple piano"
	pppp,	"quadruple piano, [etc]"
	f,	"forte"
	ff,	"fortissimo"
	fff,	"triple forte"
	ffff,	"quadruple forte, [etc]"
	mp,	"mezzo-piano"
	mf,	"mezzo-forte"
	s,	"subito (suddenly), e.g. spp (subito pianissimo), sf (subito forte)"
	z,	"sforzando = fp (forte-piano)"
	<,	"begin crescendo"
	>,	"begin diminuendo"
	(,	"continuing crescendo"
	),	"continuing diminuendo"
	[,	"end crescendo"
	],	"end diminuendo"
	X,	"explicit interpretation (not indicated in the score)"
	x,	"published interpretation (indicated in the score, often in parentheses)"
	r,	"rest (silence)"
	v,	"notated accent or stress"


In the case of crescendo and diminuendo markings,
```**dynam`` <representations/dynam.rep.html>`__ requires an explicit
interpretation of where the dynamic marking begins and ends. The
beginning of a crescendo is indicated by the less-than sign (``<``). The
end of the crescendo is marked by the open square bracket (``]``).
Between the beginning and end points, *continuation signifiers* are
encoded. For crescendos, continuations are indicated using the open
parenthesis; for diminuendos, continuations are indicated using the
closed parenthesis.

In the ``**dynam`` representation, no distinction is made for various
ways a composer might indicate a crescendo or a diminuendo. For example,
it doesn't matter whether a diminuendo is notated as *dim.*, *dimin.*,
*diminuendo*, *decres.*, *decresc.*, *decresendo*, *calando*, *morendo*,
*se perdant*, *cédéz*, *gradually quieter*, or via a hairpin or wedge
graphic diminuendo. All are represented by ``>`` ... ``)`` ... ``]``.

The ``**dynam`` representation also requires explicit resolution of
possibly ambiguous dynamic markings. In many cases, the user will be
required to add dynamic markings that are only implicit in the original
score. Interpreted dynamics are preceded by the upper-case letter ``X``,
so an interpreted diminuendo will be represented by ``X>`` ... ``X)``
... ``X]``.

Often published editions will include dynamic markings that have been
introduced by the editor. In scholarly publications these editorialisms
are indicated in parentheses or square brackets. Such interpreted
dynamics are preceded by the lower-case letter ``x``.

The use of the ```**dynam`` <representations/dynam.rep.html>`__
representation is illustrated in Example 28.1.


**Example 28.1**

    |image5|

This example might be encoded as follows:

    ``**dynam``
    \*\*kern
    \*staff1
    \*staff1
    =
    =
    p
    2c 2e 2g 2cc
    <
    .
    (
    2G 2d 2g 2b
    =
    =
    (
    2A 2c 2e 2a
    [
    .
    pp
    2E 2B 2e 2g
    =
    =
    \*-
    \*-

The ``**dynam`` encoding is interpreted as follows: the level begins
*piano* with a crescendo beginning prior to the second chord; the
crescendo continues until after the third chord and then the level
abruptly drops to *pianissimo* with the onset of the fourth chord.
Notice that dynamic markings are "read from left-to-right"; that is, we
presume that the crescendo begins *piano* and that the *pianissimo* is
an abrupt reduction in level, rather than presuming that the crescendo
builds to the *pianissimo* level and so there is an abrupt reduction in
level after the initial *piano* just before the cresendo begins. In
short, a crescendo (or diminuendo) marking is always assumed to increase
(or decrease) the dynamic level from the preceding indication.

If appropriate, a user can render implicit dynamic shading explicitly.
For example, a user might choose to re-code Example 28.1 as either

    ``**dynam``
    \*\*kern
    \*staff1
    \*staff1
    =
    =
    p
    2c 2e 2g 2cc
    <
    2G 2d 2g 2b
    =
    =
    [
    2A 2c 2e 2a
    X>
    .
    X]
    .
    pp
    2E 2B 2e 2g
    =
    =
    \*-
    \*-

or

    ``**dynam``
    \*\*kern
    \*staff1
    \*staff1
    =
    =
    p
    2c 2e 2g 2cc
    Xppp
    .
    <
    2G 2d 2g 2b
    =
    =
    (
    2A 2c 2e 2a
    [
    .
    pp
    2E 2B 2e 2g
    =
    =
    \*-
    \*-

Notice that null data records may be inserted as necessary to clarify
the moment of dynamic change. The
```**dynam`` <representations/dynam.rep.html>`__ representation makes
use of the common system for representing barlines.

The *\*\*dyn* Representation
----------------------------

The ``**dyn`` representation provides a method for representing the
orthographic appearance of notated dynamic markings. Unlike ``**dynam``,
the ``**dyn`` representation distinguishes between different ways of
identifying a dynamic marking. For example, *dim.*, *dimin.*,
*diminuendo*, *decres.*, *decresc.*, *decresendo*, are all regarded as
different from each other. Composers often have idiosyncratic ways of
writing dynamic markings. As a result, the specific terms used may have
repercussions, for example, in resolving cases of disputed composership.
In some circumstances, it is thought that individual composers
distinguish the terms in their own minds. For example, a composer might
use *decrescendo* as a general term to indicate a temporary descending
dynamic shape, whereas *diminuendo* might have a more specific meaning
of a \`dying away' or \`fade-out' gesture.

In the \*\*dyn representation the horizontal position of dynamic
markings is indicated in quarter-durations with respect to the previous
barline. This number appears prior to the dynamic signifier, hence
``4.1f`` means a *forte* (e.g., ***f***) marking just after the
horizontal position of the fourth quarter in the measure. The vertical
position of dynamic markings is indicated with respect to the middle
line of a corresponding staff; this number appears in curly braces.


.. csv-table::

	<,	begin wedge-graphic crescendo marking
	>,	begin wedge-graphic diminuendo marking
	[,	terminate wedge-graphic crescendo marking
	],	terminate wedge-graphic diminuendo marking
	(,	continuing wedge-graphic crescendo
	),	continuing wedge-graphic diminuendo
	{...},	vertical position (in staff-line steps from mid-line)
	#...,	size of marking (in staff-line steps)
	:number:,	density of dashed lines in strokes per quarter-duration
	/.../,	wedge opening size (in staff-line steps)
	r,	rest (silence)
	H,	marking appears in square brackets

By way of illustration, consider Example 28.2.

**Example 28.2:** Arnold Schoenberg, *Three Piano Pieces, Op. 11, No.
2*, excerpt.

    |image6|

Using the ``**dyn`` representation, Example 28.2 might be encoded as
follows:

    ``**dyn``
    \*\*kern
    \*\*kern
    \*\*kern
    \*staff1/2
    \*staff2
    \*staff1
    \*staff1
    \*
    \*clefF4
    \*clefG2
    \*clefG2
    \*
    \*M12/8
    \*M12/8
    \*M12/8
    =
    =
    =
    =
    0.8f{-4}
    8F# 8en
    8r
    2.ffn
    ``.``
    8A#
    8r
    .
    ``.``
    8Dn 8cn
    [8cc#
    .
    ``.``
    8F#
    8cc#]
    .
    ``.``
    8AAn 8Gn
    8ccn
    .
    ``.``
    8C#
    8bn
    .
    ``.``
    8FFn 8E-
    8b-
    [4.aan
    ``.``
    8AAn
    8ddn
    .
    ``.``
    8DD- 8C-
    8b-
    .
    ``.``
    8FFn
    4.dd
    8aa]
    ``.``
    8BBB- 8AA-
    .
    4ff#
    ``.``
    8DDn
    .
    .
    \*
    \*
    \*v
    \*v
    =
    =
    =
    ``.``
    8r
    8r
    1.4fp{-4.5}
    {8d-
    {8gn 8ccn 8ffn
    1.6>{-4.3}/1.5/
    .
    .
    )
    8fn
    8bn 8een
    2.4]{-4.3}
    .
    .
    2.5pp{-5}
    24A-
    4.cn 4.fn 4.b}
    ``.``
    24d-
    .
    2.8>/1.4/
    24Dn
    .
    )
    8.GG
    .
    4.2]
    16BB-}
    .
    ``.``
    8r
    8r
    4.4fp{-4.5}
    {8An
    {8e- 8a- 8dd-
    4.6>/1.5/
    .
    .
    )
    8d-
    8gn 8ccn
    5.2]
    .
    .
    5.4pp{-4.5}
    24F#
    4.B- 4.en 4.a}
    5.7>/1.4/
    24Bn
    .
    )
    24BB-
    .
    )
    8.DD
    .
    6.8]
    16GG}
    .
    =
    =
    =
    \*-
    \*-
    \*-

The ``*staff1/2`` tandem interpretation indicates that the dynamic
markings pertain to both staffs 1 and 2, however all vertical
```**dyn`` <representations/dyn.rep.html>`__ distance measures are
encoded with respect to staff 1. (Reversing the numerical order --
``*staff2/1`` -- would cause all distances to be measured with respect
to staff 2.) The token ``0.8f{-4}`` means that the signifier *f* is
located 0.8 quarter-duration spaces from the beginning of the bar and 4
staff-line steps below the center line of staff 1. The token
``1.6>{-4.3}/1.5/`` means that a wedge diminuendo marking begins 1.6
quarter-durations from the beginning of the bar; the size of the opening
of the wedge is 1.5 staff-line steps wide and the center of the opening
is located 4.3 staff-line steps below the center line for staff 1. The
token ``2.4]{-4.3}`` means that a wedge diminuendo marking ends 2.4
quarter-durations from the beginning of the bar; the tip of the wedge
converges at a point 4.3 staff-line steps below the center line for
staff 1. Changing this value allows tilted wedges to be represented.

The *\*\*dB* Representation
---------------------------

The ```**dB`` <representations/dB.rep.html>`__ representation provides a
way to represent intensity in decibels. Decibels can be expressed in
relative or absolute terms. Absolute values are represented according to
sound pressure level (SPL). An absolute representation is indicated by
the presence of the ``*SPL`` tandem interpretation. Zero decibels (SPL)
corresponds roughly to the quietest sound detectable under ideal
circumstances. A quiet room is roughly 40 dB in intensity; a
conversation produces roughly 70 dB, a vacuum cleaner produces roughly
80 dB, a noisy factory produces roughly 90 dB, and a passing loud
motorcycle generates roughly 100 dB (SPL).

The ``**dB`` representation provides a convenient way to represent sound
intensity in a numerical form. A numerical representation allows us to
carry out a variety of calculations and comparisons.

The *db* Command
----------------

The **db** command translates dynamic markings to dynamic level
expressed in decibels; specifically, **db** translates from the
``**dynam`` representation to ``**dB`` representation. By default,
**db** uses the following mapping:


.. csv-table::
	:header: dynamic level, dB SPL

	fffffff	115
	ffffff	110
	fffff	105
	ffff	100
	fff	90
	ff	80
	f	75
	mf	70
	mp	65
	p	60
	pp	55
	ppp	50
	pppp	45
	ppppp	40
	pppppp	35
	ppppppp	30
	v	+5


Notice the presence of the *accent* signifier (``v``); the assigned
value (``+5``) means that any encoded accents will receive a decibel
level 5 dB higher than the basic sound pressure level at that point in
the score. For example, an explicitly accented note occurring in a
*fortissimo* passage will be assigned a value of 85 dB SPL.

Users can define other mappings by using the **-f** option for **db**.
With **-f** the user provides a filename that contains the non-default
mapping values. The format for this file is the same as that shown in
the above table. Each table entry specifies a dynamic marking, followed
by a tab, followed by a numerical value.

In the case of crescendo and diminuendo markings, the **db** command
attempts to interpolate a series of values between any preceding and
subsequent dynamic markings. The following example shows a pianissimo
marking at the beginning of measure 5; a crescendo marking spans all of
measure 6, and a mezzo-forte marking appears in measure 7. The
right-most spine shows the corresponding output generated by the **db**
command. It shows an interpolation between the two dynamic levels.

    ``**dynam``
    \*\*dB
    \*SPL
    \*
    =5
    =5
    pp
    55
    .
    .
    .
    .
    .
    .
    =6
    =6
    <
    58
    (
    61
    .
    .
    (
    64
    ]
    67
    =7
    =7
    .
    .
    mf
    70
    .
    .

The interpolation begins with the crescendo indicator and increments for
each continuation signifier (i.e., the open parentheses). Interpolations
are linear and continue up to the crescendo termination signifier. The
size of the increment value depends on starting and ending dynamic
levels as well as the number of crescendo-continuation signifiers. In
the above case four pertinent crescendo signifiers separate the
pianissimo and mezzo-forte markings; each of these records has been
incremented by 3 decibels. Where necessary, decimal values are output.
Notice that null tokens (such as those in the middle of measure 6) are
ignored in the calculation.

Processing Dynamic Information
------------------------------

The ```**dB`` <representations/dB.rep.html>`__ representation can be
used to assist a number of tasks related to musical dynamics. Suppose,
for example, that we want to compare the average overall dynamic levels
for two arabesques:

    ``extract -i '**dynam' arabesque1 | db | rid -GLId | stats``
     ``extract -i '**dynam' arabesque2 | db | rid -GLId | stats``

Similarly, we might compare the overall dynamic levels between two
sections of a single work. Perhaps we wish to know whether the
exposition is on average louder than the development section:

    ``yank -s Exposition -r 1 symphony3 | extract -i '**dynam' \``

        \| db \| rid -GLId \| stats

    ``yank -s Development -r 1 symphony3 | extract -i '**dynam' \``

        \| db \| rid -GLId \| stats

Does a work tend to begin quietly and end loudly, or vice versa? Here we
might compare the first 10 measures with the final 10 measures. Notice
the use of `**ditto** <commands/ditto.html>`__ to increase the number of
values participating in the calculation of the average dynamic level:

    ``yank -n = -r 1-10 janacek | extract -i '**dynam' \``

        \| ditto -s = \| db \| rid -GLId \| stats

    ``yank -n = -r '$-10-$' janacek | extract -i '**dynam' \``

        \| ditto -s = \| db \| rid -GLId \| stats

Suppose we want to determine whether there is an association between
dynamic levels and pitch height for Klezmer music. That is, does the
music tend to be quieter for lower pitches and louder for higher
pitches? A straightforward way to determine this is to compare dynamic
level with pitch height -- represented in semitones
(```**semits`` <representations/semits.rep.html>`__). The
`**correl** <commands/correl.html>`__ command can then be used to
measure Pearson's coefficient of correlation. If there is a relationship
between pitch height and dynamic level then the correlation should be
positive.

    ``semits klezmer | correl -s ^= -m``

This command assumes an input consisting of two spines -- one
pitch-related and a ``**dB`` spine. The **-s** option for **correl** is
used to skip barlines so bar numbers aren't included in the calculation.
The **-m** option for **correl** disables the "matched pairs" criterion.
Normally, if a number is found in one spine but not the other then
**correl** will complain and terminate. With the **-m** option, each
encoded pitch need not have a corresponding dynamic level indication and
vice versa.

Similarly, we could use this same approach to determine whether there is
a relationship between duration and dynamic level. Are longer notes more
likely to be louder in Klezmer music?

    ``dur klezmer | correl -s ^= -m``

A variation on this procedure might be to restrict the comparison over a
specified pitch range. For example, one might think that higher pitches
tend to be louder but that lower pitches are neither softer nor louder
than usual. In order to test this view we can use the
`**recode** <commands/recode.html>`__ command to reassign "low" pitches
to a single value. By way of illustration, the reassignment might
presume that below G4 (semits=7) there is no relationship between pitch
height and dynamic level. We might recode all values lower than 7 to a
unique string (such as \`XXX') and then use **grep -v** to eliminate
these notes from a subsequent correlation:

    ``extract -i '**kern' klezmer | semits recode > temp1  extract -i '**dB' klezmer > temp2  assemble temp1 temp2 | grep -v 'XXX' | correl -s ^= -m``

Terraced Dynamics
-----------------

Suppose we want to identify whether various works exhibit "terraced" or
"graduated" dynamics. In the case of terraced dynamics, we would expect
to see many relatively abrupt dynamic contrasts, such as alternations
between *forte* and *piano*. There are several ways of approaching this
question. One approach might translate
```**dynam`` <representations/dynam.rep.html>`__ data to
```**dB`` <representations/dB.rep.html>`__ data and then calculate the
average (or maximum) changes in dynamic level. If a work contains many
crescendos and diminuendos markings, then most of the changes in
``**dB`` values will be small. Conversely, alternations between
contrasting dynamic levels will cause the average decibel differences to
be larger. The `**xdelta** <commands/xdelta.html>`__ command can be used
to calculate the changes in dynamic level. Notice that it is important
to avoid using the `**ditto** <commands/ditto.html>`__ command since
repeated dynamic level values will cause the average dynamic difference
to approach zero.

    ``extract -i '**dynam' haendel | db | xdelta -a -s = | rid -d \``

        \| stats

Another approach to this problem might be to count the number of dynamic
contrasts, avoiding the use of the **db** command. In the following
pipeline, we use `**context** <commands/context.html>`__ to generate
pairs of dynamic markings, and then use **grep** to count the number of
alternations between *f* and *p*.

    ``extract -i '**dynam' haendel | grep -v '[][()=rX]' | rid -d \``

        \| context -n 2 \| grep -c 'f p'

    | 
    |  ``extract -i '**dynam' haendel | grep -v '[][()=rX]' | rid -d \``

        \| context -n 2 \| grep -c 'p f'

Dynamic Swells
--------------

Conceptually, crescendos and diminuendos can be paired to form one of
two dynamic gestures. A "swell" gesture consists of a crescendo followed
by a diminuendo. Conversely, a "dip" gesture would consist of a
diminuendo followed by a crescendo. Musical intuition would suggest that
swell gestures are more common than dip gestures. We could test this
view as follows:

    ``extract -i '**dynam' grieg | grep -v '[][()=rX]' | rid -d \``

        \| context -n 2 \| grep -c '< >'

    ``extract -i '**dynam' grieg | grep -v '[][()=rX]' | rid -d \``

        \| context -n 2 \| grep -c '> <'

MIDI Dynamics
-------------

Dynamic level data is not always easily available. One possible source
is to translate MIDI key-velocity data to an estimated decibel value.
Actual sound pressure levels will depend on the timbre of the MIDI
sounds, the specific pitch played, and the volume on the output
amplifier. Nevertheless, a rough estimate of sound pressure level may be
useful for various analytic tasks. Recall that in the
```**MIDI`` <representations/MIDI.rep.html>`__ representation,
key-velocity data is encoded as the final number in three-number tokens
where numbers are separated by slashes. The first value in the triplet
is elapsed clock ticks and the second value is the MIDI key number
(positive for key-on events, negative for key-off events). By way of
reminder, the following example shows three
```**kern`` <representations/kern.rep.html>`__ notes with a
corresponding \*\*MIDI representation.

    ``**kern``
    \*\*MIDI
    \*
    \*Ch1
    4c
    72/60/64
    4d
    72/-60/64 72/62/64
    4e
    72/-62/64 72/64/64
    .
    72/-64/64
    \*-
    \*-

In order to translate to a \*\*dB representation, we must first isolate
the key velocity values for key-on events. The following
`**humsed** <commands/humsed.html>`__ command simply eliminates all data
up to (and including) the last slash character:

    ``extract -i '**MIDI' mono_input | humsed 's/.*\///'``

This will leave us with just the key-down velocity data. Let's suppose
that the following rough decibel equivalents are established:



.. csv-table::
	:header: key velocity, approximate dB SPL

	127,	85
	100,	80
	90,	77
	80,	74
	70,	70
	60,	65
	50,	60
	40,	53
	30,	44
	20,	32
	10,	21
	1,	10
	0,	0


An appropriate reassignment file for
`**recode** <commands/recode.html>`__ would begin as follows:

    ``>=127``
    85
    >=100
    80
    >=90
    77
    >=80
    74
    >=70
    70
    etc.

The completed translation would be accomplished by the following
pipeline:

    ``extract -i '**MIDI' mono_input | humsed 's/.*\///' \``

        \| recode -f reassign \| sed 's/\*\*MIDI/\*\*dB/'

Notice the use of the **sed** command to replace the \*\*MIDI
interpretation by a \*\*dB interpretation.


Reprise
-------

In this chapter we have introduced three representations related to
musical dynamics. The ```**dyn`` <representations/dyn.rep.html>`__
representation allows us to encode dynamic markings as they appear
visually in a printed score. Unfortunately, traditional notated dynamic
markings are often confusing or ambiguous. In order to facilitate some
types of analytic processing it is useful to generate a more
rationalized interpretation of the dynamics of a work. The
```**dynam`` <representations/dynam.rep.html>`__ representation provides
a canonical scheme for representing basic notated dynamic markings where
ambiguities are resolved by explicitly interpreting the meaning of
dynamic markings. A third scheme
(```**dB`` <representations/dB.rep.html>`__) provides a scheme for
representing continuous dynamic levels in decibels. We have seen that
the **db** command (which translates from ``**dynam`` to ``**dB``)
allows us to pose and answer a variety of questions related to the
dynamic organization of music.


